---
Title: Tom Hayes
Template: ListSubPages
---

# Tom Hayes

Tom Hayes was a Nottingham maths and engineering graduate [1] who became a trader for UBS, and later Citigroup. In 2015, Tom Hayes was
sentenced to 14 years in prison [2] for his contribution to manipulating the Yen Libor rate. 

Although many people are said to have rigged Libor, Hayes was the only one who used a network of traders to rig rates. He is said to
have paid out more than Â£330,000 in bribes in a single year [3].

Often the Libor submitters for the different banks would be unsure how to determine the value that they should submit. One broker, Colin
Goodman of ICAP, would give daily emails, or 'run-throughs,' where he gave his predictions for the Libor values. If there was a mistake
in his 'run-throughs,' these were often simply copied by some Libor-setters, and only corrected the next day when Goodman would give his
next set of predictions. This shows that many submitters didn't care what value of Libor was submitted. 

Hayes would use brokers' relationships with Libor setters from other banks to try to manipulate their Libor values, as well as the Libor
value supplied by his own bank. To ensure he could do this, he would bribe the brokers in the form of switch trades. This involved bank
A selling $x$ shares of company $y$ to bank B, and then half an hour later, bank B would sell $x$ shares of company $y$ back to bank A.
The broker in the middle who 'set up the trade' would get a fat sum in commissions. Either bank A or B would have to pay this (which is
small change for banks like UBS), but otherwise they didn't lose anything from the trade. 

In the Case Analysis dated 21st December 2015, the summary states:

*"The extent to which a banker had acted dishonestly in manipulating financial markets was to be judged by the ordinary standards of
reasonable and honest people, not by the standards of the market or a group of traders. Moreover, a message had to be sent to the
banking world that those who involved themselves in the fraudulent manipulation of financial markets had to expect severe sentences of
imprisonment."*


Importantly he was judged against what normal people considered to be acceptable, not what those in the business consider normal. The
Case Analysis also stated:

*"At trial, he asserted that he had not acted dishonestly, that what he had done was common practice and regarded as legitimate in the
banking industry, and that it had been encouraged by his managers."*


Here we see the case of a man who believed he wasn't doing anything wrong. His work, which was encouraged by his managers, landed him 14
years in prison. 

It's worth noting that the specific act of 'rigging Libor' wasn't a crime at the time Hayes was doing it \cite{LIBORLaw2018}; it was
made a criminal offense in 2012. Hayes' Libor rigging ended when he was fired from Citigroup in 2010
\cite{enrichLiborMastermindUnraveling}. He was instead convicted of eight counts of conspiracy to defraud in relation to manipulating
Yen Libor. This means that in the future it will be much easier to convict someone for rigging Libor, now that it has been made a law.
It is also a note of caution - if you think something is wrong in the work you're doing but there isn't an explicit law against it,
there are probably related laws that can be used against you.

Note on the Tom Hayes case: Hayes was initially charged by the U.S. for his contribution to rigging Libor. In order to get charged by
the U.K., to avoid the harsher prison system in the U.S., Hayes gave 82 hours worth of recorded interviews \cite[p.~2]{enrichLiborMastermindUnraveling} with the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) in the U.K. stating what he had done, and admitted that it was
dishonest (even though he refused to admit this in his trial). This made Hayes' case very easy for the prosecution and could be one of
the reasons that he was the only person who went to prison for rigging Libor. Three of the brokers who worked with Hayes to rig Libor
were taken to trial and acquitted because they never admitted that they did anything wrong. One of the reasons Hayes stopped cooperating
with the SFO was that he didn't want to name others involved in his 'network,' like the brokers. None of Hayes' coworkers shared the
same sentiments. As an example, Mirhat Alykulov was Hayes' mentee in UBS. After Alykulov was suspended for potentially being involved in
Libor rigging, he went to meet FBI agents and Justice Department prosecutors. Under the instruction of the FBI, he telephoned Hayes to
try to get some sort of confession out of him \footnote{The FBI made it look like the phone call was coming from Alykulov's native
country, so that Hayes believed he was talking in confidence to a friend.}. Evidence obtained from this phone call was later used
against Hayes in his trial \cite{enrichTrapTrader2017}.

### References
[1] [Who is Tom Hayes](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-33635340)

[2] R v Tom Hayes, Sentencing Remarks of Mr Justice Cooke, 3rd August 2015

[3] [Tom Hayes, 'ringmaster' of Libor fraud, given $2.5m to stay at UBS, court hears](http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/28/tom-hayes-ringmaster-libor-25m-ubs-court)
