---
Title: Libor
Template: ListSubPages
---

# Libor

<iframe width="550" height="400" src="https://prezi.com/view/fV0DGrn9ukgrf29XODgI/embed" webkitallowfullscreen="1" mozallowfullscreen="1" allowfullscreen="1"></iframe>

LIBOR - the London Interbank Offered Rate â€“ was at the centre of the 2008 global financial scandal. Used to price upwards of $300
trillion worth of exotic financial objects such as swaps, futures and options, Libor has been the tool of many malicious bankers to not
only increase their own profits, but also make the financial industry as a whole seem much healthier than it should. 

To get an understanding of what happened and what went wrong, let's go back to early 2007 when the bankers were quietly working Libor to
their advantage without anyone being too concerned...

Each day, just after 11am, 150 Libors were calculated, one value for each of ten currencies over fifteen loan time periods. For each
pair, about sixteen of the largest and most creditworthy banks were asked "At what rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by
asking for and then accepting interbank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11am?" The responses would then be listed in
order, the top and bottom quarters discarded, and the remaining values averaged out. What could go wrong?

As the question states, the Libor submitted is what the bank could do, not what it has done. Who is to say what could be done? Bankers
took advantage of this ambiguity to swing Libor up or down, depending on what suited them. At the height of the financial crash in 2008,
Libor barely represented the market at all. An interest rate used to prices hundreds of trillions of dollars worth of products was
basically the pure fabrication of greedy bankers. Many innocent people lost a lot of money. US municipalities are estimated to have lost
$455 million due to Libor manipulation.

Tom Hayes was a mathematician. He graduated from Nottingham University, and then looked towards the world of finance to make his way in
the world of work. In 2007, he was a mid-level trader at UBS, and later Citigroup. Hayes' priority was to make money. Hayes knew that
traders would stay on the good side of their bank's Libor submitter so that they could call in favours to get it pushed one way or the
other. Hayes went one step further. He knew brokers that had good relationships with the Libor submitters of other banks. He would bribe
the brokers through the use of switch trades to try to persuade other Libor submitters to push Libor where he wanted it. Switch trades
involved selling something to another bank and then buying it straight back again, which would give the broker in the middle a large sum
in commissions for barely no work. Hayes had created a network of (sometimes unknowing) accomplices to serve his trading needs. He
calculated himself that he made millions a month for his bank just through Libor rigging. Remember, in a trade if someone is making
money, then someone else must necessarily be losing money.

Hayes didn't keep this secret. His superiors encouraged him, and he was rewarded with fat bonuses. Hayes didn't think he had done
anything wrong. 

However, it was towards the end of 2007 that regulators started getting complaints that Libor didn't reflect the actual market. As the
problem intensified throughout the crash of 2008, people started investigating.

Fast forward to 2015. During a lengthy trial lasting many weeks, Hayes tried to convince twelve jurors that what he did was okay because
everyone was doing it, moreover, he was encouraged to do it. They didn't buy it. Hayes was sentenced to 14 years in prison. 

The disruption to Libor was so massive that it is going to be discontinued as of 2021 - it has been deemed essentially irrepairable.

This is a huge simplification of a very complex scandal. On this page, we have links to other resources and more in depth explanations
to help you make sense of the Libor scandal. 

And remember, don't be like Tom Hayes - think about what you're doing because ultimately you are responsible for your actions!




